Week 4 assignment 2 – Statistical Philosophy – Hypothesis about my data

The main hypothesis about my data that I wish to test has to do with whether there is "meaningful" divergence between the two selection treatment groups (i.e. "Up", which is being selected for increased sociability, and "Down", which is being selected for decreased sociability). Specifically, I hypothesized that the "Up" selection group should be more sociable than the "Down", however there should be no difference at generation 1 (since all selection lineages are derived from the same starting population), and instead the difference should increase over time.

I have planned to use a generalized linear mixed model to model the selection data. I plan to use generalized rather than general because I expect the residuals of the response variable, the "Aggregation Index", to follow a gamma distribution - most of the observations in the low end of the scale (between 1 and 2), with a long positive tail up to the upper bound of the scale at 16. 

I plan to set up a model like this (in glmer format):

Aggregation_Index ~ 1 + Treatment*Generation + (1 | Lineage) + (1 | Block) + (1 | Dish)

Overall, I can look at the main effect of treatment as an indication of the divergence, but this may be misleading as I expect there to be very little divergence in the early generations. A better test will be to look at whether the interaction parameter between Treatment and Generation is significant. This can be accomplished by looking at the estimate and confidence intervals of the interaction, as well as (or maybe instead of?) a likelihood ratio test that compares the model with the interaction to a null model without the interaction (in order to calculate a p-value, which will likely be necessary if we have hopes of publishing in our field). 

I plan to include other variables such as lineage, test block, and test dish as random factors in the model. I think this makes sense for lineage as the 4 replicate lineages per selection treatment are effectively "subject IDs", however I am a bit unsure about the block and dish variables - there is no underlying biological significance with respect to the block that flies were tested in or the dish that was used, but these may have contributed some amount of variation to the data, so I feel that assigning them as "random" variables is more appropriate. I would definitely like to learn more about this as I feel that I don't have as clear a grasp over random effects and mixed modelling in general.